1. Introducing Government and Politics
L What is Politics?
”l 1. "Man is by nature a political animal."
w 2. Politics is the authoritative allocation of resources.
| 3. Politics is that who gets what, when and how.
w 4. Politics is the sign of who gets what, when, and why.
5. Politics is the study of how people get what they want.
6. The meaning of the term Politics has been confined to business and activity which has to with the actual
conduct of the affairs of the state.
7. The process by which we select our governmental leaders and what polices these leaders produce. Politics
produces authoritative decisions about public issues.
What is Government?
l. A government is the system to govern a state or community.
2. The institution or institutions that possess the basic authority and can legitimately use force to rule over a
soclety.
3. The body of persons that constitutes the governing authority of a political unit or organization
4. Government the system or form by which a community or other political unit is governed.
5. Government, the political system by which a country or community is administered and regulated.

6. A government is the system or group of people governing an organized community, generally a state.

7. Government is the institution through which a society makes and enforces its public policies.

8. A government is a system of social control under which right to make laws, and the right to enforce them,

is vested in a particular group in society.

9. The institutions and processes through which public policies are made for society. ‘

10. A set of individuals with both the power and authority to control and direct the affairs of a group, society
or country.

11. Government is an organization or administration in which a group of people work together as a unit
(elected by people of the country) to run the nation as indicated by the defined law.

12. Government is a group of people who rule or run the institution of a country. In other words, it may be
said that a government is the body of representatives that governs and controls the state at a given time.
Government is the medium through which the power of the state is employed.

Political Science: Meaning, Definition, Nature and Scope :
Political Science-Meaning
The English word politics is derived from the Greek word ‘polis’ which means the ‘city-state’ (a
generalized form of political organization existing in ancient Greece), polity (government) and politeia
(Constitution). As such, politics, in the original Greek sense, is a study of city-state and its administration
in practical as well as philosophical terms.
Definition of Political Science
Traditional Definition:
These early definitions of political science dealt generally with state and government.
1. Paul Janet: “Political Science is that part of social science which treats the foundations of the State
i
:%»“ ﬁs?é;éj&&ym i T i g g e g ST : o oot 7 ’
@ CamScanner
| - : S. Chand & Company
: and the principles of government.” (Kapur, A.C. Principles of Political Science,
| Ltd., New Delhi, 2006, p.17) ‘5‘
l - Political Theory-
, 2. Dr. Garner: “Political Science begins and ends with the state.” (Agarwal,) R. C |
il . . o . - 07’ '3 B |
. Prm.CIples of Political Sc?e.nce, S.. Chan.d& Company Ltd., New Delhi, 2007, p ' as Political Economy
3. Sir John Seeley: “Political Science investigates the phenomena of Governme 4 magnitude.”
' deals with Wealth, Biology with life, Algebra with numbers and Geometry with space an d I\%ew Delhi I
| (Agarwal, R.C.: Political Theory-Principles of Political Science, S. Chand & Company Ltd., o
' 2007, p.3). T 3
. Politi eory- :
4. Stephen Leacock: “Political Science deals with the Government” ( Agarwal, R. C.: Political Theory ,
Principles of Political Science, S. Chand &, Company Ltd., New Delhi, 2007, p.3). :
' b
Modern Definition: . 1
In the beginning of the 20th century there developed a new way of looking at political science. Th1§ ‘new |
approach is known as behavioral approach. The main thrust of the new view is the treatment of politics as |
an activity and a process. I
1. Harold Laswell: “Politics is the study of influence and the influential” or “the study of the shaping and |
sharing of power.”
2. David Easton: “Politics is the authoritative allocation of values.” .
3. Catlin: “Political Science is the study of the act of human and social control”.
4. Andrew Heywood: “Politics can be defined as an activity through which people make, preserve and
amend the general rules under which they live.” (Source: Agarwal, R. C.: Political Theory- Principles of
Political Science, S. Chand & Company Ltd., New Delhi, 2007)
Difference between politics and Political Science '
Modern writers make a distinction between “politics “and “political Science”
1. Frederic Pollock, for the first time, broke up the subject into two parts:
(A) Theoretical politics and
(B) Practical or applied politics
Difference between theoretical politics and applied politics
The first portion covers theory of the State and Government, theory of legislation and theory of the State
as an artificial person. The subjects under the first category deal with the features of the State and the
basic principles of government and do not study actual working of any particular government.
The second part covers the study of the State and actual forms of government, Working of government
and administration. Political action and election, those who take part in the actual activities of the State
are known as politicians. They form political parties. Contest in the elections and run the government and
conduct the administration of the State. It is known as applied or practical polity, which deals with the
actual working of government.
Nature of Political Science ‘
Political Science is a part of social sciences and therefore is different from that of physical sciences like
physics and chemistry.
So the question which concerns the nature of the subject is whether Political Science is a Science or an
Art and how the nature of the discipline has undergone changes in the 20th century. _
i
g;:.’:.l.,.; _— - . - I o : i e
@ CamScanner
: t

e Political Science: An Art I
Sc1f:nce is umvc-:rsal and a s'ystcmalic body of knowledge, based on accurate and impartial facts, through (
which observation, comparison and experimentation can be made.

' Aplp.arentlyl, .Politi.cal Science does not have some of these features. And therefore, Earnest Barker |
(British political thinker), James Bryce (British political thinker), Charles A. Beard (British historian) and J
others were reluctant to accept Political Science as a science. ‘
The following are some arguments against the notion of Political
Science as a Science:

A) Lack of precise and standard definitions of terms and concepts.

B) Complexity of political phenomena due to variation in the nature and habits of people.

C) Diversity of ‘environments’ in which political developments take place.

D) Problems of experimentation to arrive at valid conclusions.

Political Science: As a Science ‘

A) American political thinkers like David Easton tried to establish a scientific basis of Political Science.

B) Aristotle called it a Master Science through which civilization could be saved.

The following are some arguments in favor of the notion of Political Science as a Science:

A) Recently, political theory has developed based on facts and verifiable data, e.g., voting behavior and
theories of election.

B) Political experiments are not completely ruled out.

C) The government itself is a continuous experiment.

D) It is possible to make predictions on the basis of social experimentations to a certain extent.

Broad conclusions can be drawn in Political Science

such as—an independent and impartial judiciary and a free press is essential for democracy .
A) Empirical studies are based on careful observation and classification. Political Science puts a
hypothesis or an assumption to empirical verification. Theories are not

built on speculation. Political Scientists today employ survey methods, graphs, charts and other scientific
tools to arrive at their research conclusions.

B) Political Science is thus a science, though not like the physical sciences. Itis a social science.
American political scientist, Robert Dahl states that Political science is both a Science and an Art.

Art refers to practical application of knowledge. Political Science applies the knowledge about political
events for creating a good social and political order. Hence it is an art.

Whenever students of Political Science test their theories against the
data of experience by observation, the political analysis can be regarded as scientific.
When this political analysis is applied for the working of political institutions it becomes an art.
Changing dynamics of the meaning and nature of Political Science
A) After the World War I1, the meaning and nature of political science have undergone a sea change.
B) Now political science is closely related to all aspects of social relations, rather than an activity centered
F - ri L - r --l . =:
@ CamScanner
7 ) institutions of government. : . .
; Cl; tslftll:l::?x;s and of_iectives of political science have changed due to factors such as the rise of the L
' power theory and behaviouralism. !
i D) Political Science has ceased to be merely the science of state-craft. ) ) litical .
i E) Political Science is concerned with all facets of power relations and human behavior having politica '
implications in the society. . 4
F) Politics is portrayed as a process of conflict resolution, in which rival views or competlr'lg interests are ‘
' reconciled for the benefit of all. The new meaning of Political Science includes the dynamics of power
and struggle at various levels—Ilocal, regional, national and international.
G) So the aims and objectives of Political Science have changed due to factors such as the rise of the
' power theory and behaviouralism. '
I
Scope of Political Science
Political science as a discipline deals with various aspects like:
A) Study of state and government- it deals with the nature and formation of the State and tries to “
understand various forms and functions of the government. i
B) Study of associations and institutions- in organized way the fundamental problems of political ]
science include, first, an investigation of the origin and the nature of the state, second an inquiry into the -
nature, history and forms of political institutions and third, deduction, therefore, so far as possible, of laws
of political growth and development.
C) Study of national and international problems- modern demands of defense of territory,
representative government and national unity have made political science not only the science of political
independence but that of state sovereignty also.
D) Study of political behavior of man- it may be said that the character of political science in all its
parts is determined by its basic pre-supposition regarding man.
E) Study of the past, present and future of development- political science attempts to explain the
meaning and the essential nature of the state and deals with the laws of its progress and development
within itself and in relation to international organizations and other states.
F) Study of the concepts of power, authority & influence- with the behavioral revolution the central
topic for study has become the study of power. Consequently, the scope has widened to include new
aspects like political socialization, political culture, political development and
informal structures like interest and pressure groups. “
Conclusion
A) In the contemporary time, the meaning of Political Science has become more and more inclusive.
B) Earlier political science had been defined by many scholars from the point of view of the State and
Government.
C) But now the term political system brings the study of political science closer to other systems such as
the economic system, the cultural system, the legal system and other social systems all of which operate
within the larger social environment.
D) Regarding the nature of Political Science there is a difference of opinion among scholars whether
political science is a science or an art.
Political scientists have put forward some arguments in favor of the notion that political science is a
science, such as —
A) Political theory has developed based on facts and verifiable data, like, voting behavior and
theories of election; . .
B) In political science there is much scope for experiments, for example the government 1tself is a
continuous process of experiment; -
O y it e Bt . - e s
@ CamScanner
E) Political scientists tod on careful observation and classification.
. ientists today employ survey method -
f their research conclusions. y s, graphs, charts and other scientific tools to arrive at
At the same time another section of political scientists opine that political sci i >
forward some political science is an art and they put
argument in favor of this notion, such as-
C) diversity of ‘environme‘;ts’ inm;E?Chue tlo variation in the nature and hE.lbltS of people;
political developments take place;
, D) problems of experimentation to arrive at valid conclusions.
2. Basic Concepts of Political Science
Political Ideology
What is Political Ideology?
# One’s basic beliefs about power, poli-tic;al values and the role of government.
# Grows out of economical, educational, and social conditions and experiences.
An ideology is a set of opinions or beliefs of a group or an individual. Very often ideology refers to a set :
of political beliefs or a set of ideas that characterize a particular culture. i
# A definition of ideology must be neutral: it must reject the notion that ideologies are good or bad true O
false, or liberating or oppressive. .
. # Ideology as an action-oriented belief system, an interrelated set of ideas that in some way g_uides or
inspires political action.
Characteristics of Ideology ' : :
# Ideology have their levels end in -ism.
# Ideologies provide an explanation for problems but confronts modern societies by providing futuristic
visions.
# Ideology is action-oriented. .
# Ideologies mobilize a large number of people.
The roles of political ideologies
The role of political ideologies is to establish a set of ideas that can be used to provide the foundation of
political organization. As a result, all political ideologies have three specific features:
1. A realistic interpretation of society as it currently is.
5. An idealized interpretation of society. Essentially, an idea of what society should be like.
3. An action plan on how to create a society that reflects the needs and wants of all its citizens.
Essentially, a plan of how to get from number one to number two.
:
.
: .
%ﬁ‘f’;ﬁﬂlﬁxﬂﬂkwjdqu;ﬁmﬁﬂ;~ At ,v_“,m.,‘:,: AR S - e o i .
st Kbt B D e A AR e T i AR e 3 st T -
@ CamScanner
v ok
] List of political ideologies - '
| ¢
| Politdcal 3 |
i Ideology! Core Frames? Ideological Markers |
f. anti-clericalism, chaos and disorder, direct action, free, autonomous human |
- ) anti-statism, beings, natural social order, no economic control, N0 ciety |
Anarchism economic management, no political authority, no regulation, perfect Soessar'y
. freedorr_w, radicalism, respect, social solidarity, stateless society, unnec |
) utoplanism state, unregulated market economy, voluntary agreement
) common morality, faith in God, family traditions, fa.m“Y values,
authority, functionalism, guidance for social actions, hierarchical society,
= hierarchy, human | individual tendency for corruption, national identity, national
onservatism imperfection, loyalty, paternalism, pragmatism, search for security, social
organic society, gradation, social justice, social obligations, social order, social
' tradition, property | principles, state authority, strong criminal regime, strong |
government, traditional mores, traditional practices :
y
) air pollution, biodiversity, climate change, ecological balance, :
conservation, ecosystems, environmental organisations, environmental
Ecol ecology, protection, global warming, natural disasters caused by human
cologisin env}ronmeptal interventions, natural resources, non-human life, preservation,
ethics, holism, renewable sources, restoration and/or improvement of the natural
: sustainability environment, social balance and harmony, soil and water pollution,
sustainable growth, waste management I
3
. :
anti-rationalism, anti-capitalist, anti-communist, anti-conservative, anti-immigration, i
i elitism, lgadership, anti-intellectualism, anti-liberal, authority, commitment and faith, :
Fascism state socialism, competition natural for human progress, corporatism, duty,
struggle, ultra- heroism, honour, patriarchy, power, progress, self-sacrifice, state
nationalism worship 1
Feminism E?f;]:::nycznd abortion, anti sex oppression, anti-subordination, body autonomy ’;‘
4 and integrity, child sexual abuse, deconstructing gender identities, e
Political Beliefs v
Political beliefs mean an individual's opinion, manifested in speech or association, concerning the social, J
economic and governmental structure of society and its institutions. '1
;
Political socialization Factors
1. Family; J
2. Religious Institutions; i;
B i
3. Community-rural, urban; :
. . 1
4. Race and Ethnicity; ]
5. Social class; i
6. Level of Education; ]
7. Media; ]
8. Teachers; .
9. Peer Group;
10. National Identity and |
11. Gender. |
- . " i 'f
@ CamScanner
/ 1
|
1
Authority |
|
! In the fields of soci(.)l('wgy and political science, authority is the legitimate power of a person or group over 1
i other people. In a civil state, authority is practiced in ways such a Jjudicial branch or an executive branch '
. of government. |
|
Authority refers to the legal and formal right to give commands and make decisions. For example, a ‘
manager has the authority to revise employees' work schedules based on the needs of the company.
1. The power or right to give orders, make decisions, and enforceobedience.
2. A person or organization having political or administrative power and control.
3. The power to determine, adjudicate, or otherwise settle issues or disputes; jurisdiction;
the right to control, command, or determine.
4. A power or right delegated or given; authorization: Who has the authority to grant
permission?
5. A person or body of persons in whom authority is vested, as a governmental agency: The
housing authority provides rental assistance payments to low-income residents. The
bridges and piers are built and maintained by the Port Authority. |
6. Usually authorities. persons having the legal power to make and enforce the law.
Weber’s Three Types of Authority
| Type [ Example |
TRADITIONAL Patrimonial, Patriarch
CHARISMATIC Mother Teresa, Napoleon
RETIONAL- LEGAL Bangladesh Jatio Sanshod |
| Traditional authority is a type of authority that relies on cultural norms and practices for its
legitimacy. :
“Resting on an established belief in the U Monarchy %{%‘%‘_ it i
sanctity of immemorial traditions and the R Patriarchy . A
legitimacy of those exercising authority R T e N |
under them ... obedience Is owed tothe | Batdmoplalstlt B
person of the chief who occupies the @ Feudalism - '%
traditionally sanctioned position of 8 E“t;‘s“;;s‘“““““"" O
authority and who is (within its sphere) f T TR, :.-,"t}q,t
bound by tradition.” (Weber, 1978) @ Religion e TR T e X qug ‘
e AR e AT 1
- et  a : - g '
@ CamScanner
Authority
In the fields of mci(.\h‘\p,‘\ and political science, authority is the legitimate power of a person or group over
other people. In a civil state, authority is practiced in ways such a judicial branch or an executive branch
of government. N
|
Authority refers to the legal and formal right to give commands and make decisions. For example, a '
manager has the authority to revise employees' work schedules based on the needs of the company
I. The power or right to give orders, make decisions, and enforceobedience.
2. A person or organization having political or administrative power and control.
3. The power to determine, adjudicate, or otherwise settle issues or disputes; jurisdiction;
the right to control, command, or determine.
4. A power or right delegated or given; authorization: Who has the authority to grant
permission?
5. A person or body of persons in whom authority is vested, as a governmental agency: The
housing authority provides rental assistance payments to low-income residents. The
bridges and piers are built and maintained by the Port Authority.
6. Usually authorities. persons having the legal power to make and enforce the law.
Weber’s Three Types of Authority
_Example 4_*
TRADITIONAL Patrimonial, Patriarchy
CHARISMATIC Mother Teresa, Napoleon
RETIONAL- LEGAL Bangladesh Jatio Sanshod
S 0 S, SR i e R
Traditional authority Is a type of authority that relies on cultural norms and practices for its
legitimacy.
T A S g T T, T -
m m \
“Resting on an established belief in the 9 E‘STE}E___--___-__-..
sanctity of immemorial traditions and the R Patriarchy
legitimacy of those exercising authority S —————————— B
under them ... obedience Is owed to the 8 Patrimonlalism
person of the chief who occuples the @ Feudalism
traditionally sanctioned position of A et e o 1L
5] te systems
authority and who Is (within its sphere) ’ e Y
bound by tradition.” (Weber, 1978) @ Religlon iR
- - -t o
!f'?::ﬁ-. I- W -'I._" . '_.'.-‘._ - . - .. .
e . EI'r;'::.‘.:._E"'-_r.‘.'-...u'.'."_.'-— - ' '
@ CamScanner
' Primary vs. Secondary |
| Authorities \
‘ * Primary: ' :
* Positive sources of law — create rights and obligations. ‘
f * Federal and state. ‘
‘ « Examples: Constitutions, statutes, administrative rules and '
regulations, case law. :
* May be binding.
J * Secondary: - ‘
f « Not positive sources of law — do not create rights or f

N | obligations:

N | « Describe, summarize, criticize, seek changesto law. ‘

e | * Examples: legal encyclopedias, law review articles,

] restatements, uniform and model laws. :

‘ ’ « Never binding. :

e e e i L ke f i b O IZ Wy,

L % Authority is that form of power which 15 legalized and
legitimized . Authority is a form of power e.g. a statute
giving power to an minister. IF a person has power due to a

- special office , he occupies, this is known as authority.

- = Example- Police Commissioner has  authority to issue
order and get them obeyed by wvirtue of authority he

" occupies. B SRR A rat g, R

- = Power + legitimacy = Authority. :

~ # Authority consists of two important components: power
and legitimacy. A A

~* Authority means legitimate power which hasbeen

~-approved by the people or power in accordance with the

- constitution or the law of the state. A

* A government officer is competent to use authority- his

authority is clearly definied. 7

@ CamScanner
' T Comparison-table it ™™ z
No l
l | § Type of naler Chagismatic beader  Damdpant rﬁmhn.tl'mlp{rttwa or
. - pemsonality 1Mauanttc officials
2 Position Having dynamic  Hseablished  Leg2l ﬂ"‘""ﬂlﬁg@.ﬁ% ‘
' determingdd by  personality ~ raditional or authority HHL'E_K
- '3 RuledUsing  Ewira-ondinary  Acquinedor  Vietus of ratsonally
qualities and inherited L :Hlﬂm[ibﬂi rmm:édmn 2
eyl excoptional povwers | ( hereditary alﬂ:rmt%/
L waldeio s rawmiom
' 4  Legitimized  Victories and Bstablished ~ General bellef in the formal
E e SUCCESS 10 - waditiomal or corvectness of these nale
| 'ﬁ,'::_::._'f;f'::_:e  community moutine - and those who enact them
. : R o o el et A B e T et are consédered a
: B e T
i
|
| = Comparison-table
M S Particular | Charismatic | Traditional | Legal Rational
g lmlt)’ygxfgmﬂwmal & ‘Basslon  To suthority/ mles
dSehd ‘ﬁv»w‘w& Wml rraditional ,; R
. Vataan Wpaade 0
i ideveral o {commiment)
6 Cohesion ~ Emotionally  Feelingol  Abiding by rules :'"'"3
' - ( Structure { opstableand  common 000 e
pﬁ“ orgatization - volmide = puarpese
| , Leadership Houlers and. j' Established Rubes, not nslers
| e ]Fnﬂwm i o nf potlad, S EEa R R
5 i m s v R e
L '
Ly [
i
f
:
T o
L
Pl S amimesd BT . i
@ CamScanner
| Authority v. Power
| — k.
! = Examples of Authority:
' — Congress has the authority to pass laws.
* Lay & collect taxes (16th amendment)
— Mayor/Council has authority to make ordinances. |
- Examples of Power:
— Exccutive Departments have the power to enforce laws,
* IRS makes sure that you pay your taxces.
— Police has power to enforce laws.
-
Difference between power and authority
“Authority is legally enforced and is derived from level of  Power however id individual and.lndcpf-fnfle"_l and I
position in an organization. : originates from charisma and social positioning.
Authority is formal based upon superior and subordinate Power is informal and is based upon individual
relationship. understanding. — i
Since authority is related with position in an organization, Power is linked with an individual and transcends R
it has limited scope and is confined to organizational boundaries. b
'ructurc (it
Authority is just and applied cqualy Power may be used indiscrimipatf!y, — ) I
Authority is institutional and is given by organization to a Power is not so given by the institution. It is one s ability
position. Anybody who is offered that positions, enjoys 1o influence others decision and it is acquired by the
the authority attached to that position. people. Az
Authority relationship can be found out by anybody by But there is no power centers dotted on the organization
looking up the organization chart. There are authority chart and it cannot be located anywhere else.
centers _ - R
Authority is always attached to the position. The higher Power has no relation with the position. A person even at
the position on the organization chart, the bigger the low level may enjoy the power of influencing the decision
: authority. making or even highly placed official having a lot of
: 7 authority, may be proved powerless
Authority has no concern with the politics because itis not Element of politics is inherent in power
attached to a person. Power is attached to a person. o
(b Bankofinfo.com
W
What Is Power in Politics?
1. Thomas Hobbes
‘Power simply is no more, but the excess of the power of one above that of another.’
2. Max Weber
‘Power is ‘the probability that one actor within a social relationship will be in a position to carry
out his will despite resistances.’
3. Talcott Parsons .
* Power is a ‘mechanism operating to bring about changes... in the process of social interaction.’
i —a o, L ) . ' - - - - -'-:
Eowndn =0l U N L0 was e e d s I g & Ty A g, TR A ) I e SRR s .
@ CamScanner
i 3 L N .
. { 4. Foucault ch :
I » ‘Power as such does not exist’ but power ‘needs to be considered as a productive network whic! |
runs through the whole social body.’
. .
‘ e Basis and Types of Power
| . . . X ertise:
In a general sense, we can identify three sources of power, namely, positional,relatlonaland e :“mity-
ePositional power: This is based on the formal position of a person in an organizationor com -
- . . . e
*Relationships: This is based on the social and cultural capital of a person. InfOfmalpO:;;e jaw of
[ from the relationships and alliances you form with others. If you do a favor for someonle, | power.
] . . . >
! reciprocity 1mpacts your relationship. Coalitions andalliances increase your relationa ' ise
I *Expertise: Some people generate power based on their knowledge, hexs will
. technical competencies and ability to articulate ideas or a vision that . ot erersonal
[ follow. Communication skills, charisma and trustworthiness help ~determine F:he1959
| power.Social psychologists John French and Bertram Raven did a notable study on power - b asis
l j and revised their position in 1965. Till today, this is the dominant way of explainingthe forms orrt and
'! of power. The six bases identified include coercive, reward, legitimate,fefefe“t> expef ver
| informational power. The table below explains the basis and types O pow=t:
‘ Basis of Power Types
' Impersonal Reward; Personal Reward
}' Formal Legitimacy; Legitimacy of Reciprocity; Equity; Dependence
| Positive Expert; Negative Expert
Positive Referent; Negative Referent
Informational Direct Information; Indirect Information
10 Se T Ponrs
: " sgitimate [l . Referent
Formal b Expert Power.
Power. ‘ Power. Power.
Coercive Reward Informational Connection
| Power. Power. Powe r. ower.;
‘ Political Charismatic
i Power. Power. ]
’ , . ) » {EduNote.com
I
2.1 Coercion _
Coercive power uses the threat of force to gain advantage of the situation. Force may
include physical, social, emotional, political, or economic means. The main idea behind thisconcept is
that someone is forced to do something that he/she does not desire to do. Themain goal of coercion is
obedience to the master who gives the order.
2.1.1 Impersonal Coercion '
Impersonal coercion refers to 2 power holder’s/ person's belief that the influencing agent
@ CamScanner
has the real power to physically threaten, impose a monetary fine or dismiss an employee i
2.1.2 Personal Coercion \
Personal coercion relates to a threat of rejection or the possibility of disapproval from a \
, person whom is highly valued
f 2.2 Reward '
, Reward power is based on the right of some to offer or deny tangible, social, emotional, orspiritual . .
rewards to others for doing what is wanted or expected of them. An examples ofpositive reward power is .
i a praise a soldier receives for lengthy service at retirement party.An example of negative reward is a
driver is fined for illegal parking. Pitfall of heavy :
Reliance on reward power is that people become fixated and too much dependent on .
rewards. One needs to understand that eventually, as time passes, past rewards becomeinsufficient to
activate desired outcomes '
2.2.1 Impersonal Reward = '
Impersonal reward relates to (promises of) promotions, monetary benefits and rewards
from various social areas ‘.
2.2.2 Personal Reward IRt
Personal reward relates to the reward of receiving approval from a desired person and
building relationships N
2.3 Legitimacy
legitimate power comes from an elected or appointed position of authority. Rewarding andpunishing
subordinates is generally seen as a legitimate part of the formal or appointedleadership role. This type of
formal power relies on position. Three bases of legitimatepower are cultural values, acceptance of social _
structure, and designation. One who useslegitimate power may have a high need for power.
2.3.1 Formal Legitimacy
the formal legitimate power is based on the social norm and legal mandate which requirespeople to be
obedient to those who hold superior positions in a formal social structure. Anexample of formal
legitimate position includes a police officer's legitimacy to make arrests.
2.3.2 Legitimacy of Reciprocity
The legitimate power of reciprocity is based on the social norm of reciprocity which stateshow we feel
obligated to do something in return for someone who does something beneficialfor us. There is private
reciprocation as well as public reciprocation. In private reciprocation,norm of reciprocity is usually
internalized. All major ethical and religious traditions includereciprocity as a primary rule of moral
behavior. In public reciprocation, initial favor and thefollowing repayment always unfolds in a public
way. . '
2.3.3 Equity '
Equity is based on the social norm of compensatory damages. The social norm of equitymakes people
feel compelled to compensate someone who has suffered or worked hard.
2.3.4 Dependence ‘
The legitimate power of dependence is based on the social norm of social responsibility .
which dwells on how people feel obligated to help someone who is in need of assistance.
People traditionally obey the person with this power solely based on their role, position or
: title rather than the person specifically as a leader. Therefore, this type of power can easily _ _ .
' be lost and the leader does not have his position or title anymore. - N
4, - L 'I R . _m|1'.:
@ CamScanner
"'1 L I S R - N CEE N © NN B ‘ “Bidan
| L
% 2.4 Expert
: e 5Expert powers are based on “what one knows”. When individuals perceive or assume that
! aperson possesses superior abilities, they award power to that person. Thus, expertise canbe
- demonstrated by reputation, credentials and actions. Sometimes, expertise can bepseudo/ not i
1 genuine.
I 2.4.1 Positive Expert 1
[ Positive expert power influences the target to act accordingly as instructed by the expert. Itis !
| based on the assumption that the expert has the correct knowledge. |
2.4.2 Negative Expert |
Negative expert power is a form of power which can result from a person acting in |
opposition to the experts instructions if the target feels that the expert has personal gain i1
motives. "9
2.5 Referent |
Referent power is rooted in the affiliations we make and/or the groups and organizations |
webelong to. Referent power refers to the ability of some individuals to attract people andbuild |
loyalty. Such power is based on the charisma of the power holder. For example afounder of an .
NGO or voluntary organization has the charisma to attract thousands ofpeople for a protest. Such
kind of power is called referent power. But one should be carefulthat abuse of such power is |
possible if the person uses it for personal advantage at the costof the group's position. i
2.5.1 Positive Referent :
Positive referent power utilizes the shared connection or belief between the influencing
agent and target with the intention of positive change in the target. .
2.5.2 Negative Referent i
Negative referent power produces actions in opposition/ contravention to the intent of the
influencing agent, this is the result from the agent's creation of mental discomfort/ stress ,
between the influencing agent and the target's perception of that influence.
2.6 Informational
Informational power is the ability of an agent to bring about change through the resource
ofinformation. Informational influence results which is acceptance by the target audiencesgladly.
In order to establish Information Power, an agent of influence would likely provide abaseline of
information to a target of influence to lay the groundwork in order to be effectivewith future
actions and persistent follow-up exercises.
2.6.1 Direct Information
Information presented by the influencing agent directly to the target of change is called asdirect
' information.
What is legitimacy according to Marx Weber?
According to Weber, that a political regime is legitimate means that its participants have
certain beliefs or faith in regard to it:
In Qolitical science, legitimacy is the right and acceptance of an authority, usually a governing law or a
regime.
1
i
i 4
@ CamScanner
\_ " S B o . - = = e B
/ , ,
~ Vulnerable™— Justice ———procedures :
prioritized l fair i
Outcomes Multiple \ - .
, fair discourses\ '
Effectiveness ~ _ L Participation &
- - Results ArBSI:t]er X deliberation
achieved b A G g
Effici R g i 7
R fficient Legitimac Performance
A esource use ST
. 3 iE gl observed
\ _ i ,J,‘\i’ Information l
i olicie P AT
e — i 4 an ~,accessed
COherence allgn .‘ﬁh_i:% ~N Transparency :
\ ' Authority “ /
- Standards responsive i ' '
adhered to l P rogressd i
) s monitare
TN Accountability «—
e 0 o4 0 - - ; 4 i "'. - o .
Sources of Political Legitimacy .
All governments need legitimacy to survive. But how do governments attain authority? What A
makes citizens obey or feel loyal toward their governments? Scholars have answered these
questions by concluding that political legitimacy comes from several sources:
e Tradition: The government has authority because its citizens have a long tradition of giving it
authority and respect. This source mostly comes into play with governments that have been
around for a long time.
e Habit: Most people are raised to obey the laws, and they thereby acquire the habit of obeying.
Citizens give their government legitimacy and authority because that is what they have always
done. )
e History: People remember great deeds and events in the country’s history, and they obey the
government out of a sense of historical pride. Eanl
e Religion: In some places, obedience to the government is seen as a religious obligation.
e Ethnic identity: Countries composed of exclusively one ethnic group or whose regime is
' strongly connected to one ethnic group can inspire obedience through ethnic identity. Members of '
that ethnic group respect the government because of its link to their ethnicity. ,
e Results: If a government succeeds in some way—for instance, through a military victory or a
thriving economy—citizens may feel loyalty because of that success.
e Elections: A government that holds elections gains legitimacy because citizens believe that the
government, composed of elected officials, represents them. :
* International recognition: A government gains legitimacy when other governments recognize it
and welcome it to the international community.
:'.."I ‘_ B . - o ._ e, . c o AT
et S e T B L : oo L e i N LW 241 ™1 Ar -
@ CamScanner
= T S e | . 1 o A . —'CE.'
Representative Normative Goal :
deliberation & cultural attainment
expectation!
) Governability Efficiency
e (measure of
- capabilities)
Distributive . ionnoliti Problem — )
. b Construction Sacio po|§;1.c4:l Vg Leaming
ERAT legitimacy acceptability capacity
Access to A : _ ~
informatio _ S
Accountability Authorily and
~ distribution of
Legal “~._[ Procedural responsibilities
& socio-  equity and
political Transparency), . justice e
mechanisms
S~— Reasoning in
constructions of O ot
morality and
justice . O Sob-(sub}-theme denoting factors inflaencing of
principles closely aligned 1o the construction of the core theme
., & I
Factors That Affect Legitimacy
What is a nation-state simple definition? 4
A nation-state would be a sovereign territory with one group of individuals who share a common
history. Today, a true nation-state in the academic sense of the world does not exist. Nearly every state
(country) in the world contains more than one national group.
Positive popular Negative p(:)p}ular
devoﬁig: o dcvoluuo':-
Decentralisation | l HETS I
| e i of authority and |
_ i responsibility i
: Strong subnational w5 s Strong central
E (state) legitimacy ' L3 .' y legitimacy
i Initial political Inital political ——
§ Historic factors support for | support for “r,';mm,"
| ibe states I l the centre i
e - LA S % L
b S i . = ¢ i, e e L s I el e ]
@ CamScanner
TR A & R TR I
What is a nation-state simple definition? |
A nation-state would be a sovereign territory with one group of individuals wh ;
common history. Today, a true nation-state in the academi who share a [
' Nearly every stat ; the academic sense of the world does not exist. i
y every state (country) in the world contains more than one national grou !
What is a nation-state and an example? Sroup- , \
%
ﬁoizgéig'jﬁtﬁelss& ::Vlg;:l;glnlsta.te in which the cultural borders .of a nation match the
) . - Examples include Iceland and Japan. A multi-state nation is when an
i ethnic group is a predominant group across multiple states. An example includes Koreans. _ i
What are the 7 characteristics of a nation? B g
You will notice that the difference between a state and a nation is basically about their different {
distinguishing features. i
e Common Descent | 1
o Geographical Boundaries ’
e Government o '
o Common Language :
o Infrequent Internal Ethnic Conflicts ' :
o Common Religion - '
e Same Cultural Practices '
1. Common Descent '
Persons inhabiting a nation usually have a common origin and descent. ' .
2. Geographical Boundaries
A nation which is at the same time a state has clear-cut geographical boundaries. People that :
form a nation may live within a defined territory. i
3. Government
Most nation-states have their own political institutions that come together to form a government.
4. Common Language
Inhabitants of a nation have a common language
5. Infrequent Internal Ethnic Conflicts "
One other unique characteristic (and advantage) of a nation is the fact that conflicts and
disagreements are not as pronounced as is the case in diverse and heterogeneous states.
6. Common Religion
People inhabiting the nation tend to have a common religion.
7. Same Cultural Practices
. People of a nation usually have common customary or traditional practices. This is perhaps one
of the most striking characteristics of a nation. '
) L
i
What do you mean by nationalism? f
It holds that each nation should govern itself, free from outside interference (self-determination), '
that a nation is a natural and ideal basis for a polity, and that the nation is the only rightful source I
of political power. i
i
. »
! f
R, BB S e e SR o S R e e AR R S . ._.;;_!-lmll ol AP o e i!%
@ CamScanner
- — e A ettt |
What is nationalism in simple form? .
Nationalism is a belief in the superiority of your nation over all other nations. At its most extreme, is @ '
view that can lead to discrimination and prejudice. For some, nationalism is seen as a positive force, .'|
leading to increased pride in one's country and a desire to protect its sovereignty and culture. 'll
|
What is nationalism and its example? , l
Nationalism is an ideology that a person's nation is superior to all others. The root of I
nationalism is often based on shared ethnicity. An example of nationalism can be seen in much ,
of Adolf Hitler's rhetoric. The difference between nationalism and patriotism is the feeling of 1
superiority. J
What are the 8 elements/the roots of nationalism? ,
« Political—desire for power or autonomy. '
, + Social—concern for group values, customs and traditions.
: « Economic—concern for standard of living or monetary gain. ,
f o Culture—shared beliefs and a way of life create a common bond. :
i  History— a shared past connects people as a group.
, + Religion—a common religion helps unites people.
o Language— a common language is a key element of nationalism.
o Territory—a shared land gives people a sense of unity. _
« What is the simple definition of sovereignty?
« :Supreme power especially over a body politic. : Freedom from external control:
autonomy. : One that is sovereign. Especially: an autonomous state. :
« Why is state sovereignty? :
o A sovereign state is a state that has the highest authority over a territory. International law
defines sovereign states as having a permanent population, defined territory, a
government not under another and the capacity to interact with other sovereign states. ,
o What are sovereignty principles?
« "The principle of sovereignty is one of the fundamental principles of international law
and applies in cyberspace. It refers to the supreme authority of every State within its
territory to the exclusion of other States, and also in its relations with other States.
' o What is sovereignty and its main characteristics?
« Sovereignty is the original power of the state. No internal or external organisation can
delegate to a state its sovereignty. The state cannot be dependent on any other state for its
; sovereignty. If the sovereignty of a state is not original, it cannot be called sovereignty.
It's an innate feature of the state.
I What are the types of sovereignty?
'
E Types of Sovereignty : '
\ o Titular sovereignty refers to an office that has supreme authority in name only. ...
| o Internal sovereignty rc.afe.rs }o a government capable of demanding obedience from all
: persons and parties within it. ...
'| » Legal sovereignty refers to the highest legal power.
' o Who believed in sovereignty?
T L S TN A S NP S e QP S TS PP e iy _uwa:w{
@ CamScanner
> e e R e e e e ----—-—1
o Popular sovereignty in its modern sense i i .
4 represented by Thomas Hobbes (158;25631;)1’(1‘;33}::3{32&5 (t ;)g:};l;ff 7C(l)i] eoniraet schol 1
Jacques Rousseau (1712-1778). )»and Jean- !
Z:tehzurzzsf;tnf:jort;f:::gor:ii:z"cf sovereignty contains four aspects consisting of territory, population, ;i
’ What is justice and equity? 1
| EqU}ty is defined as “the state, quality or ideal of being just, impartial and fair.” The concept of |
equity 1s synonymous with fairness and justice. It is helpful to think of equity as not simply a
: desired state of affairs or a lofty value.
What is an example of equity and justice?
For example, pursuing health equity means pursuing social justice in health, where no one is i
denied the possibility to be healthy because they belong to a group that has historically been
excluded from accessing health resources ]
How is equity different than justice?
Equity and Justice
Practicing equity helps address imbalanced social systems. However, justice can take equity 1
one step further by changing societal systems in order to achieve sustainable and equitable access
, for future generations in the long-term.
What is the rule of justice and equity? o
, Justice and equity in this principle surmises the equal, unbiased distribution of justice in a
- society, but also it may express a sense of ideal, an ultimate goal, or at least a direction that
: law must follow. The general principle of equity and justice offers a better cohesion to other
. principles of law.
- What is equity vs. equality?
4 Equality means each individual or group of people is given the same resources or opportunities.
Equity recognizes that each person has different circumstances and allocates the exact resources |
and opportunities needed to reach an equal outcome.
What is an example of equity in society?
Defining Equity
The goal of equity is to help achieve fairness in treatment and outcomes. It's a way in which
equality is achieved. For example, the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) were written so
that people with disabilities are ensured equal access to public places. §
Equity is a solution for addressing imbalanced social systems. Justice can take equity one step further by
fixing the systems in a way that leads to long-term, sustainable, equitable access for generations to
come.
What are the characteristics of equity? t
What are “Equity Characteristics™? The term equity characteristics relate to six key : ;
characteristics vis-a-vis stocks. These are size, style, volatility, location, stage of development,
and type of share.
; What are the 5 dimensions of equity?
These conceptions became known as the 5 Dimensions of Equity™: aspiration, access,
achievement, economic progress, and engagement.
What is the importance of justice in line with equality? 2
: i
oS M i R SR M e AT N NI e RS R TR B A" 25 L1 £ 5 o, ik o Wb ostiom s, oy o
@ CamScanner
?_3- ;—lwgw R s R I L g ey vy '
i JUSTICE is the collective responsibility of a free and just society, to ensure that civil and human
d rights are preserved and protected for each individual regardless of gender, race, ethnicity, nation
' of origin, sexual orientation, class, physical or mental ability, and age.
Types of Liberty
o Natural liberty means natural freedom of an individual without any restrictions. ... _
« Civil liberty [2] is the one which is followed by the society and each individual enjoy it.
» Political liberty: ...
« Individual liberty: ... i
q e Economic liberty: ... 1
'i « National liberty: ... g
: e Religious liberty: ... §
i e Moral liberty: é
i
‘ !
f The six fundamental rights are right to equality, right to freedom, right against exploitation, E,
i right to freedom of religion, cultural and educational rights and right to constitutional
'I remedies. ,
What are the first 5 liberties?
The five freedoms it protects: speech, religion, press, assembly, and the right to petition the
government. Together, these five guaranteed freedoms make the people of the United States of
America the freest in the world.
. What are the 4 parts of freedom?
His "four essential human freedoms" included some phrases already familiar to Americans from
the Bill of Rights, as well as some new phrases: freedom of speech, freedom of worship,
‘ freedom from want, and freedom from fear.
& What are the 4 fundamentals of freedom? ]
“
g e Freedom of speech. ,
Y e Freedom of worship.
1 e Freedom from want.
g e Freedom from fear. i
l§ . ;
- o What is the 7 step to freedom?
. « Seven Steps to Freedom was created to help answer these questions and more. Love !
' Acceptance Forgiveness Positive life changes Perseverance in trials and challenges !
é Hope and vision for a future Learn your purpose here on earth and what might be in store {
*. for you happily ever after. i
L]
5 +  What are the 2 levels of freedom? ; !
1 * The two most generic forms of freedom are natural freedom, which implies the absence of ’
i social constraint upon action; and there is social freedom, which entails the capacity for
| action (power-to) due to mutually beneficial structural constraint. These two freedoms are
l in constant tension.
E * What are elements of freedom? |
k o There are two elements that define freedom: Voluntariness and Responsibility.
|fl Voluntariness refers to the ability of a person to act out of his or her own free will and self- i
4 H
i 1 ‘ . ) . i 1
@ CamScanner
determmatlon: This means that a person may decide to act or not, and these decisions
made out of his or her own free will. ' are
‘ . Types
of liberty
.T"ultl ral Social/ Morxral
liberty civil liberxrty liberty
Personal Political
1iberty liberty
EcOnomic n IDOomestic
liberty iIibcrty y
National International
Iiberty ' 1ibcrty -
i—
it WM BN F = ; £ PR
fxg~LI BERTY - FEATURES
| e R . SRRSO
T Liberty does not mean the absence ofall e -
e restraints
S= Eiberty admits the presence of rational restraints
. andthe absence of irrational restraints.
.= Liberty postulates the existence. ofsuch -
e conditions as can enable the people toenjoy
. = Liberty enables the individual to develop their
s personalities. i
Freedom is understood as either having the ability to act or change without constraint or to possess the
power and resources to fulfill one's purposes unhindered.
What is freedom in simple words?
freedom. noun. free-dom 'fréd-om. : the state of being free : liberty, independence. : ability to
move or act freely.
What are the three points of freedom?
The first kind of freedom is “freedom from,” a freedom from the constraints of society. Second,
is “freedom to,” a freedom to do what we want to do. Thirdly, there is “freedom to be,” a
freedom, not just to do what we want, but a freedom to be who we were meant to be.
3. State
A state is & political division of a body of people that occupies a territory defined by frontiers. The state is
sovereign in its territory (also referred to as jurisdiction) and has the authority to enforce a system of rules
over the people living inside it.
@ CamScanner
- e G : o : - .
: A state is an autonomous political unit. This unit usually includes many different groups within their
- territory which the state holds centralized power over. In order for a country or political unit to be
- considered a state it must be sovereign, meaning that it is self-governing and holds supreme power.
) Essential Elements of State =~ , - -
_ The State Must, Therefore, Possess the Essential Elements of State are- - K
“ 1.Population, o . E
_ 2.Territory ‘ A ' y
- 3.Government .4
£ 4.Sovereignty - ‘ ;
1.Population is Essential Elements of State.
- Two conclusions flow from the discussion on the meaning and nature of the state: :
_ (D) that the State is a human institution the product of man’s gregarious nature and the result of necessities
i of human life, and
. (2) population and land are the starting point of any study of man in his organized groups. It is the people
o who make the State; without them, there can be none. But the population must be large enough to make a
- State and sustain it. s s
2. Territory '

- The small States, on the other hand, are relatively less secure. They fall easy prey to bigger States, which

- are usually aggressive, and history is full of examples of many a naked aggression. Hitler in no time

a trampled Poland and other Central European countries. Japan did the same in the Far East.

' The recent opinion is invariably in favor of the bigger States. Trietschke, the German philosopher, in his

o work on “Politics” (Politik), published a little before World War-1, declared that “the State is power,” and

, it is a sin for the State to be small. He said that even the idea of a small State is ridiculous because of its
weakness, which in itself is reprehensible because it masquerades as strength. =
3. Government.

The purpose of living together cannot be realized unless they are properly organized and accept certain
rules of conduct. The agency created to enforce such rules of conduct and to ensure obedience is called

' government. Government is the focus of the common purpose of the people occupying a definite territory.

' Through this medium, common policies are determined, common affairs are regulated, and common
interests are promoted.

Without government, the people will be just a babel of tongues with no cohesion and means of collective
action. They would divide themselves into groups, parties, and even warring associations, creating

: conditions of utter chaos and even civil war.

' Therefore, there must be a common authority and a consequent order wherever people live. It is the
prerequisite of human life, and, as such, the government is an essential element of the State. The State can
not exist without a government, no matter what form a government may assume.

. 4. Sovereignty
The sovereignty of the State is its most essential and distinguishable feature. As people inhabiting a
definite portion of territory and having a government do not constitute a state. They must be internally
supreme and free from external control. The sovereignty of the State has two aspects, internal

' sovereignty, and external sovereignty. Internal sovereignty is the State’s monopoly of authority inside its

' boundaries.

This authority cannot be shared with any other State, and none of its members within its territory can owe

'_ obedience to any other State. If the State admits no rival within its own territory, it logically follows that

', it has no authority outside its own territory.

' ORIGIN OF STATE

o 0O DIVINE ORIGIN THEORY -

- OTHEORY OF FORCE '

1 B o » .

@ CamScanner
0 SOCIAL CONTRACT THEORY I
0 EVOLUTIONARY THEORY |
' DIVINE ORIGIN THEORY '
The supporters of this theo i '
! ry believed that t ' . . '
handiwork of God on the earth, the theo af :'c state doesn't come nto being by the people but it is the
the state. d ry ol divine origin of the state is the oldest theory of the origin of
the theory explai . )
establishre}:j e\:ipt]l?(l)l:lst éflztl)iotllllt il;O\(’;’ ﬂleTsltate ‘came into existence. According to Plato the state cannot be
appoints the king, od. The king of Egypt was held as God. According to Christianity God
The Divine Origin Theory of the state believes in the following postulates:
(1) King is appointed by the God.
(2) The right of kingship is hereditary. - .
(3) Thg king is responsible to God for his actions. : o :
(4) It is sin to disobey the command of the king.
Advantages of the Divine Origin Theory The divine origin theory of the state had the following
advantages:
1. The fear of God maintained discipline and peace in the subjects and resulted in spontaneous
subordination.
2. This conjoined religious and political institutions. Thus, religion and the state ruled together.
3. This theory-maintained obedience, cooperation and the sense of responsibility among the citizens.
4.1t provided for a moral basis to the state as the morality was derived from religion.
Causes of the Rejection of Divine Origin
However, the following causes led to rejection of the Divine origin theory of state in the seventeenth
century:
1. The social contract theory of the origin of the state requested to the people.
. 2. The church and the state were separated in Europe.
3. The rise of Nationalism also gave blow to this theory as it was opposed to the autocracy of the king.
THEORY OF FORCE ' .
According to Leacock, the theory of force as origin of the state, means that the state is the result of war.
In the words of Voltaire, “The first king was a fortunate (successful) warrior.” War created the king.
Thus, according to this theory, the state does not depend on religion or on logic or reason, but on force. "
0 The most ancient of all laws, gives to the stronger rule over the weaker.”
0 According to this theory “State is power, it is sin for a state to be weak, state is the public power of
offence and defense.”
6 Oppenheimer said that the aim of the state is the economic exploitation of the weak subjects. '
8 Engels has written, “Without force and iron nothing is achieved in history.”
Value of Force Theory ‘
The following may be pointed out in its favor: '
1. It is true that states have been built by force. No states have been born without force.
2. From practical viewpoint also, force is required by a state. In the words of Kant, “Even a population
of devils would find it to their advantage to establish a coercive state by general consent.
3. Wars also support the value of force. The force, however, cannot be considered as the sole and only
cause of the origin of the state. These elements such as will of them asses etc., should also be considered.
g:.nhﬂ}lv,"l'f‘h B TS O T WP oy I, (Y "
@ CamScanner
F R A R S L S U L S A i bR el S e B ] S A e T s e mmee ey ‘g %
{ N
II
SOCIAL CONTRACT THEORY . .
Some thinkers in ancient Greece, supported social conlmct.thcory of statf:. It has been admitted by Plato I
and Aristotle. But the most important support and explanation of the social contract theory of state, was .
found in the works of Thomas Hobbes, John Locke and Jean Jacques Rousseau. |
Fundamentals of Social Contract Theory . I
In spite of differences in details in the theories advanced by Hobbes, Locke and Rousseau the following _
characteristics may be held as the fundamental principles of the social contract theory:
O According to this theory the state is based upon a contract between the ruler and the ruled and among
the ruled themselves.
O This theory is against the evolutionary theory of the state. According to this theory men have created
the state and men maintain it for the fulfillment of their needs.
O Though Hobbes, Locke and Rousseau equally admit the theory of Social Contract, they have expressed
different ideas concerning the nature of this contract. For some writers, the contract was social for others
; it was legal while for some it was both.
f
0 All these thinkers admit that authority is a necessary element of state. ' |
0 These thinkers have interpreted human nature differently. Hobbes considered it as selfish while Locke '
considered it as altruistic. Rousseau accepted both. :
EVOLUTIONARY THEORY )
According to the followers of evolutionary theory, the state has not been born but is a result of evolution.
' In the words of Burgess, "The state is a product of history, means that it is gradual and continuous "
_ development of human society. "Thus, the state has gradually evolved. ;
Elements in the Evolution of State ‘
The following elements have made important contribution in the evolution of state:
Blood Relationship: Blood relationship has been the most important source of unity among human :
beings. The families united to form the tribe and the tribal leader was the first king. Thus, state has f
evolved out of families. I . ' - I
Religion: Thousands of years Pointing out the value of religion in the formation of state, In the earliest ‘
and most difficult periods of political development, religion alone could subordinate barbaric anarchy and )
teach respect and obedience. were needed to create that discipline and obedience of authority. |
Authority: Authority has been the most important element in the evolution of the state. States, first small j
and then big, were formed on the basis of authority. |
Political Consciousness: By the gradual evolution of political consciousness autocratic kingship gave i
place to limited kingship and finally to democracy. Thus, the state has changed its form with the change
of political consciousness. ‘ ,
Economic Need: As the economic associations and institutions gradually became complex, new types of
state were evolved to solve their needs. |
Social Tendency: In the end, the social consciousness of men has been the most important factor in the '
evolution of the states. Thus, state is a growth and not a make. The evolutionary theory of the origin of
the state incorporates the important elements of Divine origin theory, Force theory, social contract theory .
etc.
I!;va £ gt - ‘1 Porme s b, i - N 3 I = -. noe s, Db e 4'-;?;
knm*g;kggmhgum I AR AR ot YL A et s - b R e A S A Y
@ CamScanner
- AT Ty e n L s B
1
STATE AND ITS FUNCTIONS ;

- is a political organization of socj ;]
in. o.rder to carry gUt general soc(i):llztfyfatil;:;t ras the poprer to manage the territorially organized population -
-itisa subject of: public international law; : l

-isa set qf ofﬁc!a{l author.itie's (state apparatus) operatfng throughout the country:

- 1s a special political-territorial organization of soc; i oo . '
There are the following f 1 O1g of society, which has sovereignty, a special apparatus of |
1. The main fonct g ufnctlons of the s.tate: _ |

development and exis?;sc:ofttl;; :tt:ttee’isviv::(:h are ‘reallzed throughout its existence, without which the

. possible:

- economic;

- political; )

- law enforcement;

- humanitarian; ' ,

- informational; ' '

- public health; _ )

- defense, etc. e -

2. Additional functions are areas of state activity that are components of the main functions and through '
which they are implemented. " o o

Thus, additional functions are:

- development of medical science;

- creation of preventive and curative medical institutions;

- training of medical personnel of different qualifications;

- providing the needs of medicine with material means, etc. -

The main functions of the state can be classified into different groups:

A. Internal functions, the implementation of which is carried out within the country and which ensure
the domestic policy of the state:

- economical,; - ,

- political;

- social; i :

- ecological;

- humanitarian;

- law enforcement, etc. .

B. External functions, the implementation of which is carried out in the international arena, which ensure
the foreign policy of the state: '

- diplomatic, related to the establishment and maintenance of relations with foreign countries;

- international cooperation in various fields;

- environmental;

' _ maintenance of international law and order; .

- protection of the state from external encroachments, etc. - |
2. In the sphere of public life: ' ,
A. Economic functions [3]: '

- protection of various forms of ownership; i i
- development of production; |
- creating conditions to ensure the rights of citizens in entrepreneurial activity; .
- disposal of state property, etc.; =
B. Political functions: - :
- development of domestic policy; . '

- creating conditions for the development of democracy; ' '

- ensuring the rights of citizens to free political activity; . | .
- protection and defense of the constitutional order, etc.; ' ' '
C. Humanitarian functions: i .

- development of science and culture; ' ‘

- providing education and upbringing of the population; .
@ CamScanner
\. - development of national self-consciousness of the people;
) - protection of cultural heritage, etc.;
:. D. Social functions [4]:
- ensuring social protection of citizens; !
- creation of a system of national and non-state social insurance; !
- creation of a network of special institutions for the care of the disabled; :
Necessity of State 1
) i
The necessity of the state can be understood through various philosophical, political, and social .
- lenses. Here are some key points highlighting its importance: !
1. Order and Security '
e Law Epforcement: The state maintains law and order through police and judicial systems, ]
protecting citizens from crime and ensuring justice. |
e N atlon'al Defense: A state provides defense against external threats, maintaining sovereignty and i
protecting its citizens. I
" 2. Public Services E
* Infrastructure: The state is responsible for building and maintaining infrastructure such as ;
roads, schools, and hospitals. 4
* Social Services: It provides essential services, including healthcare, education, and welfare |
programs, to promote the well-being of its citizens. I
3. Economic Stability |
' J Regulatipn: The state regulates the economy to prevent monopolies, protect consumers, and I;.
- ensure fair practices. |
) * Fiscal Policy: It manages taxation and public spending to promote economic stability and {
. growth. .
, 4. Social Cohesion !
e National Identity: The state fosters a sense of belonging and national identity among its citizens, '
which can promote social cohesion.
* Conflict Resolution: It provides mechanisms for resolving disputes among individuals and
groups, reducing social tensions.
5. Representation and Democracy -
 Political Participation: The state enables citizens to participate in governance through
democratic processes, ensuring that their voices are heard.
e Rights Protection: It upholds and protects the rights and freedoms of individuals, promoting
equality and justice. -
6. Crisis Management '
» Disaster Response: The state coordinates responses to natural disasters, public health crises, and -
emergencies to protect citizens and restore order. :
e Economic Interventions: It can intervene in the economy during recessions or crises to stabilize i
markets and support recovery.
FUNCTIONS OF THE STATE ' .
The functions of the state can be categorized into several key areas, each serving a vital role in f
maintaining order, providing services, and ensuring the welfare of its citizens. Here are the .
_ primary functions of the state: ;
Rt e R G it e oe s b A e TR T e e T S0 e e
@ CamScanner
1. Legislative Function
e Law Making: The state creates laws that govern society, establishing rules and regulations for
behavior.
 Policy Formulation: It develops policies that address social, economic, and political issues,
2. Executive Function
e Implementation of Laws: The state enforces laws and policies through various government
agencies.
e Administration: It manages public services and oversees the functioning of government
departments.
3. Judicial Function
e Dispute Resolution: The state provides a legal system to resolve disputes between individuals
and entities.
e Justice Administration: It ensures justice through courts, upholding the rule of law and
protecting individual rights.
4. Defensive Function
e National Defense: The state protects its territory and citizens from external threats through
military forces.
e Security Services: It maintains internal security through police and intelligence services.
5. Economic Function
e Regulation of Economy: The state regulates economic activities to promote fair competition and
prevent monopolies.
o TFiscal Policies: It manages taxation and public expenditure to promote economic stability and
growth.
6. Social Welfare Function
o Public Services: The state provides essential services such as healthcare, education, ‘and social
security.
e Poverty Alleviation: It implements programs aimed at reducing poverty and inequality. o
7. Cultural Function
o Promotion of Culture: The state promotes cultural heritage and values, fostering social cohesion
and national identity.
e Support for Arts and Education: It supports educational institutions and cultural initiatives.
8. Environmental Function
e Sustainability Measures: The state enacts policies to protect the environment and promote
sustainable development.
e Resource Management: It manages natural resources to ensure their conservation for future
generations.
INTERACTION BETEEN STATES AND CITIZENS IN THE AGE OF INTERNATE
The interaction between states and citizens in the age of the internet has transformed
significantly, impacting communication, governance, and civic engagement. Here are some key
aspects of this interaction:
1. Enhanced Communication
e Direct Engagement: Citizens can communicate directly with government officials through social '
media, emails, and online platforms, increasing transparency and accountability.
e Real-Time Information: The internet allows for the rapid dissemination of information .
regarding government policies, services, and events.
2. E-Government Services
e Online Services: Many states provide services such as tax filing, license applications, and public
records online, making it easier for citizens to access government resources.
* Digital Participation: Citizens can engage in e-governance through online voting, consultations,
and public forums. :
@ CamScanner
R e T L Tk T ST e
i 3. Civic Participation
e Mobilization and Advocacy: The internet enables grassroots movements and advocacy
. campaigns, allowing citizens to organize and mobilize around issues. |
f " o Petitions and Feedback: Online platforms facilitate petitions and feedback mechanisms, giving L
" citizens a voice in policy-making. :
' 4. Access to Information
e, Tt e e Transparency: The internet promotes transparency by allowing citizens to access government |
. data, budgets, and decision-making processes. ;
; e Informed Citizenry: With vast amounts of information available online, citizens can educate |
.’ themselves about political issues and hold governments accountable.
T 5. Social Media Influence
* Public Discourse: Social media has become a platform for public debate, allowing citizens to
ﬁ express opinions and influence public policy.
. - ,, * Political Campaigning: Politicians and parties use social media for campaigning, reaching a
- : broader audience and engaging with constituents.
B > 6. Challenges of Misinformation
" o * Spread of Fake News: The internet can facilitate the spread of misinformation and propaganda, |
' complicating the relationship between states and citizens. |
i * Erosion of Trust: Misinformation can lead to distrust in government institutions and the media,
affecting civic engagement. |
g 7. Privacy and Surveillance i
: e Data Collection: Governments may collect data on citizens for security and governance
purposes, raising concerns about privacy and civil liberties.
* Surveillance: Increased surveillance capabilities can lead to tensions between state security
measures and individual freedoms. ST P '
o _ o o
e s Ve
8. Globalization of Issues
* Cross-Border Activism: The internet allows for global movements and collaborations, enabling |
citizens to address transnational issues like climate change and human rights. |
_ e Awareness and Solidarity: Citizens can connect with global communities, fostering awareness
and solidarity for various causes.
' -I:'I":- .HI 'l =n 1 Il
4. Government ' SR
Ariscotie has classified The gowermmernt om the *
basis of number ruler/s T
TR : Pre s g A e e ey RO N TR B R N ‘
s , BEES R BN CWRMNES L L :
Rule by O . Tomnarnchy - ’l‘f,.-n}utn_}ﬁé‘%\\\ L |
: i u.l.i iv Ha:ni Pol.u- - S _, B um - i i k.
. J
e S SRR s i b it i s o s A
@ CamScanner
1 e i = e
e e ety
L
I
-Aristotle, classified
WO r - ' Statas
Perinciplaes - oOnN the basis of
(1) 1IN whom the so .
- (2) Wi veraign POowner
athar it is axarcised 's are vested?
COTTIE t h
"y Trunity or for the goo ":;C;r the good of the
tis good for th < the ruler?
comect state. If ile'isoog MmMunity then it is QA pPure
% AAL - oot - - =
aewWwant starto for the ruler it is a
ristotle’'s best Gowvernr '
i s Owermnrrment...
R WD, SMvOee that | 2 - 4
2 a3 S :dmll s hhand ten achkiese, and esen .
. <1 BT W peyeeer i ‘ -3, o . 2
R R e Iﬂl:.t:-!.'le: Aclhwercatech o Faraay o F rrbsxesdc '

- E 2 O H J = - Soom .

g' i heag v o TPobiey, i bich all citixens “malcamnd

;- e ubecd by twaen™ . armd pee B " ki

: iR - Prowaer B mro ruogpoo ki ed by no SR

; > el 1l ¢

LE, P cuelawr cllass.

] .
RN 2 - - I -

Ny P Ariscorlce™s bhest " - - »

B, rertrrgooo = best Grovernrmeng was @ Polity. which: a= o -

A WHAD SN N P Y E .

5 i an arsshocnacy with some sonsc o e rave Y, : .

TR PPorted by a strong: middile class S

e A risED oo s o viardll - o P

i - tle was a vigormuscritic of democracy. '

- o - - gl - ‘." s - N = ‘ - e M
- - " 4 L s B S I'. - - » -
v - " o o=l N - - -~ '. -"."\\ o . i
- . R - - [ - -
eh . : B ) | I' g 1 - ] : v
1 . -1 N = o T . . B . - B
e R T - e nBE m Y v ' B T
LN 4SSV S T A T R TR RS e e e Sy S R BT T N A TN SO AT T S v e L G
RARLE e A S T R Y fiets A A T R U T R e sy e AT B TR T R R RN
5?“@' NN et N ALY ‘%"F‘.asﬁf‘?f:‘.ﬂ R AT N B e S A S S T e HAR
: 8 S e hban Sle it S S VI e S S e A SRR e D] DRl e Dl SRR SN i ot
MR A T A R B E A S b S e NG R TR e e SR el el LN e Sl RN «.v‘rr;ﬁ;’;;(:m R
- Ly, j FNRG Sweiin e ) LR e T T T G0 SRR B S AR LT S e AT 3
?2.3{,‘ it £ AN 130 BN A R e SRR S S hg@g%gse;s;;{g_&.%;Qy:,g.;;;:zv;;:-’,:»_”{ﬁg"{a«‘:~~,:’»,"~xf':-v;
LSRR Eovig il 7 e Sl X SR S R R SRR SN e S A R
, QAT 3o e B SRR R TR U e T S TP "y LSRTLE Gl A e

: Dt ataes) 3 D O et I e ST R it Lt
I R T R
| b g
l 4, .,:»,,;.‘,‘.

T R R VP a4 02 A R s Modern Governments ; SR T e e e S S e
e ST 1 Soae i S AL S O U S RSk, LTS L SN T SR D W g
F& R ¥ N ‘?‘*"'C; "*h‘k'&\;\. TN S et A Y y 2 AT B4  RMTL SET R Tey :\'-‘._-;\\é‘,#{f.’.;"‘k»}?:ffxr,_')_ ,:El:',"‘;' T fb' LA T,

Bt Rt e A 7 Despagie o B30 1) . L Demeeratie D i S SRR Y
B R R g, 1 AR SRS P o A S B i T e G
3‘3.." A :\ Sagh Limited Monarchy AU AR s g Sy LSRR et Republie & 7 1. e Al UG P

S ‘.-7.‘*\‘?; P R S e : AVCTR 5-"",’%“1}'*»*5:»*'-"':#:' SN E St e NS S AL £ 3 b S U >',;.,/,:3;!’»://‘;.'?'{,,;3";';5;,, e

FAINCA RN T N e S R T S ARG R L i e T T iR e Vel S b o
R AT Loty s SN A ey 7 Al Taal g Sl Lt i St W LR ke |
s ‘ss&\‘ e : Neren e BRI Sl &) “"‘-;'\' AT Bt e »(;"{- I e Ve85 0 g S04 f"'lw,'}"i""“ 5L ‘:
dj‘\ L. U Parlamentany Nou Parliamentary . Palinmesnry  NenParliamentary | e L R

.+ . Paliamentary . NoaParliamentary . o . Parliamtenta ."v\'aa-Parlixmemarv{‘v-"-‘-3{‘"7""}??:-';’«;’,::'./47532%%

PR B X e s S S U IO S S O e g U i St T e e S AR s M
cw{f)ﬂx.\?‘:‘s o A ek L e LD AN 2 = g Ll R 2 S B T SR LA b R R -
;K’«“«L‘v:"’ﬁ\z}'« R N A e R e Sy e e ’(4,15( £ S v A5 S S R s A S S R ] e

) B ii s Pt I Gl I T s S 3P Yering e L e e N P08 TR iR S L i bt Y A LA T M L M X T g PV
o %‘?\R}““‘ﬁ{'c Py e L N e el g A0S e o s L e N R L Rl e g L vt R G LN A i s et 9o LML e Dl
L e e SN A TP . W TR ey A R P L SR et NI PR S S S v A U9 o TS e 7 7 G s
”{4_,;" B AR et by 15 U Y g e S A e e A S 8 T T R A

e % Yo e e T e e e e Il LA b 3 et 0T g S Ll PO oy e S S8 B G ]

N AL PER e VA i ] R B i O o e T M e P et AP SN e e S hY
%ﬁ“zmyvl"’:‘i R e W S T GO Mt S S o 78 b (i SR gy LA B 8 e K ) 58
T B R A Ry ST A W e AL Gk i s T gt Bt DB Y et el Sl b Do Sp il o S

P NN R e e O, 4 G 30 i e £ Do A S o et o M Lo SR ST Tt s S

R e I M S B P e U SR e e
e i 3 g R N e ;i"'* AT Bl g ey .:.’-*:;:5-*'1*(‘;""-;‘ Rivg S
o §. 4800 B I o e i 1 bl R Ay SRR - . 5 SogRa T -4 IRl

0o SRR o ST s R R e (i e R R ez :
i e
.
\
. - I " N =
" - - 1 == - T e ©
w L o= .- 'a M - . o - " . f 1 - ot .?’;\r-
- N . - = . . "ol
. g
@ CamScanner
Government : 3 Governance 3
4 State vs. market resp. sociely y State, market and networks as
complementary forms of steering
ﬁ Polity =« Focus on the state - Institutional structure, which combines 1
;‘ ‘?:7,7 - Majoritarian democracy and hierarchy clements of hierarchy, negotiation systems 3
| “-.ﬁ}g'%ﬁ as most important institutions and competition mechanisms ,{
: - Networks 1
' Politics . Competition between political parties ® Conflicts between governing/leading i
fheis for acquisition of power and between interest  and governed/affected actors ;
A groups to gain influence . Steering and co-ordination within
“ ff'\:‘ q« b Conflict regulation by decision of institutional steering systems
i L{W responsible state organs and enforcement of . Negotiations between state and/or
i -:tv;vy official decisions societal actors
. FPLT-N . Adaptation of institutional steering
. systems
poHcy 3 ° Legislation (order and prohibition) . Agreement (within networks and
- Eh ;ﬁ ® Distribution of public goods communities), compromises, barter
TS ® Co-production of collective goods
- Network management
. Institution building (management of
1 et institutional change
Source: (Umbach, 2007, p. 37); translated version of Benz 2004, p.2l.
— )
—‘l—a'r‘b‘:i’e"""?"" e *w—-cd't_:i-- e “rn_b,.ll,_... d T aed S reimnmncuin mcs Fams Fow S irivt nnier s Adieriomssnzionre £ mvusmosmn cuom e eenm s Yt e
aracteristics of government and governance
Hierarchical sStructure
Closed networks Extensive networks
Few linkages Extensive linkages
Representatives . Representative plus
" experimenting in new forms
of participation
Routine pPolicy-making INnnovative policy-making
due to a greater range of
participants
Dimasion (rermenl vernang 5
a3 ] il ; = 0t
The Role of Governmert Mugr Actor Onéof Muny Ao s
Authity & Decion Makin Cotled Coomid e Cotrl—— | Dol Nogeion k P~
Sysem Suchun (losed & Verical e & Horizont -.
[1_ Too
Demecratc Process Rirgasnlle Patcipdlory
(11 ' ) o .‘ » vy I:
- N d | d ) J .
Accruniabi Process Ouiputs Quality Outcomes | Commanty Leve] Outeomas
3 4 . . . 1 “s - _j
Decenirlzed Plce Sensive !
. v o
it e Mo, 2
i J & .
Soue: ek M,
@ CamScanner
ol bl - ) " T ey
Ju Government .
: Polity Governance B
Number of institutions ~ Few _ =
: . Many v
ucra -
: Bux:et-t tic structure Hierarchical, Consolidated D |
: Politics ecentred, Fragmented
| ; ) , |
se““’rk-‘: Closed/Minimal Extensive |
ower relations Public authorit ing subi |
. authorities as 'steem}g subjects, Unclear division between steering |
Policy pnivate actors as steering objects subjects and steering objects |
Mode of polici ind .
Stee P o s Routinized Innovative leaming
Ng mode Regl%latlons and Norms, Commands or ~ Agreements and compromises
prohibition
\“—____—_—_
Source: Own tabulation on the basis of Albers 1993, Benz 2005 and John 2001
“.Government is created to secure the inalienable rights of all citizens — i.e., the right to life,
liberty and the pursuit of happiness” — Thomas Jefferson.
‘ Functions of State
The government functions in broadly following categorigs:
1. Regulatory functions, -
2. Service providing functions, and . . ’
3. Developmental functions.
Regulatory Functions: '
Need of regulation:
e Our constitution grants various freedoms to the citizens of India. However, if everyone is
allowed to pursue complete freedom, then it could affect the freedom of other persons.
o This necessitates the regulatory role of government. -
The regulatory structure of government: o :} .
e Constitution: The Indian Constitution provides a regulatory role to the government. The
government (Central and State) can make laws on various subjects. Besides, under Article 19 of
the Indian Constitution, the government is empowered to impose reasonable restrictions on the
exercise of various Rights that are conferred by Article 19.
o Laws: The State has enacted various laws to impose restrictions on citizens’ activities in
society’s larger interest.
» Organizations: Then, the State creates a large number of organizations to implement these laws.
Challenges in regulation:
o However, obtaining ‘optimal regulation’ (i.e. striking a balance between an individual’s freedom
and the interests of society) is difficult. It’s because both too many restrictions and too little
regulations can put citizens in a lot of trouble.
* [Excessive regulation: It has been suggested that India is overly regulated. This is due to: .
* A great number of regulations are in place. =
ERPINE DT S -~ S : o
@ CamScanner
. e )
o | | a0
E |
¢ Old and ineffective regulations that are present in the statute books unnecess.ari'l y.
*  The proclivity to over-legislate, which leads to legislation becoming an end in itself; and ‘ﬂe
* Regulating for the sake of regulation. 3
*  Weak regulation: However, insufficient regulatory procedures thwart public interest, owing to a :
lack of staff in regulatory organizations and inadequate oversight of these entities, .
* Poor regulation also leads to corrupt and unethical practices.
Recommendations:
For attaining ‘optimum regulation’, the Government should follow the following principles.

* Avoid over-regulation (Self-regulation):

* Itis often said that the best regulation for taxation is self-regulation.

* In circumstances where a permission/ license must be renewed on a regular basis, the “principle
of voluntary compliance” should be followed. J

*  Avoid over-regulation (tune them to present times):

. GO}’emment should carry out detailed scrutiny of all laws and regulations — it should be at the
Union, State and Local levels.

* Then it should repeal unnecessary regulations and update outdated ones.

* Capacity building:

. GOVemment should give Proper attention to the capacity building of regulatory bodies to keep
pace with the demand. i

* Take steps to reduce corruption: Take the following procedures to guarantee that regulatory
measures do not devolve into unscrupulous activities.

. ]?,ffec'tlve Supervision: Effective oversight of the agencies that carry out these regulatory
funf:thns 1s required. Internal supervision by supervisory personnel should be reinforced by a
periodic assessment by an outside organization.

s Si'm].)lify regulation: Simplify transactions, make use of technology, increase openness, and

! eliminate secrecy. ’

-‘ o Il}'tfolvir}g citizens’ groups,.profession?l organizations in the regulation activities: Associating

Ii c1tlzen§ groups and profe.ssmnal orgaplzations to certify compliance and report infractions of the
regulations to the appropriate authorities can share the weight of the enforcement apparatus,

* Regulatory mechanisms should be responsive and aim for the speedy disposal of cases.

Service Providing Functions of Government:

¢ The government provides a social as well as infrastructural services to citizens:

* Sanitation, education, health, etc. social services.

* Road, power, drinking water, etc. infrastructural services.

* Recommendations: _

*  There is a need to guarantee that service providers are more efficient and accountable. Full cost
recovery, effective implementation of Citizens’ Charters, citizen feedback mechanisms, and
public-private partnerships are some of the methods for achieving these goals.

* The government should also develop a single-window system.

* Single window system to deliver the service: Adoption of a ‘single window system’ approach
has been done by many governments in the world for efficient and effective delivery of services.

* Reasons for it: L

* The basic aim of this approach is to reduce the hassle caused to the citizens while running in
many government offices for getting different servic.es. ' N

* Single Window system minimizes delay and maximizes convenience to citizens.

* Approaches towards a single-window system: This is achieved in several ways.

imﬁv - v VPR B 2 R S S ~ R o 10
@ CamScanner
£ 4
“) « Approach 1: A service providing organization re-engineer its processes to deliver all its services
~ through a single outlet/unit. .
' o Approach 2: Create an organization that will build an infrastructure that will allow diverse |
government agencies to deliver services to citizens from a single place.

« Approach 3:Some countries have chosen to collaborate rather than create a separate

¥ organization to construct a shared service delivery infrastructure.

« For Single Window Agencies at the state level: Empower them to enable them to provide
relevant services.

« Use of ICT: An essential prerequisite for implementing single-window clearance is thorough
business process re-engineering in government organizations, aided by Information and
Communications Technology (ICT). ICT has enabled governments to deliver services to citizens
in a faster, more efficient and transparent manner.

Government as a developmental functionary:

Many welfare and development programs have been created and implemented by the
~ government with the goal of improving the socioeconomic status of its population.

Separation of Powers

the modern 'doctrine of separation of powers' proposes that the three functions of government, legislative

(making the law), executive (enacting the law) and judicial (interpreting the law), be enacted by three

autonomous and independent branches of government.

Separation of powers, therefore, refers to the division of government responsibilities into distinct

branches to limit any one branch from exercising the core functions of another. The intent is to prevent

the concentration of power and provide for checks and balances.

separation of powers, division of the legislative, executive, and judicial functions of government among

separate and independent bodies. Such a separation, it has been argued, limits the possibility of arbitrary

excesses by government, since the sanction of all three branches is required for the making, executing,

and administering of laws.

The doctrine may be traced to ancient and medieval theories of mixed government, which argued that the

processes of government should involve the different elements in society such as monarchic, aristocratic,

and democratic interests. The first modern formulation of the doctrine was that of the French political

philosopher Montesquieu in De [’esprit des lois (1748; The Spirit of Laws), although the English

philosopher John Locke had earlier argued that legislative power should be divided between king

and Parliament.

Montesquieu’s argument that liberty is most effectively safeguarded by the separation of powers was

inspired by the English constitution, although his interpretation of English political realities has since

been disputed. His work was widely influential, most notably in America, where it profoundly influenced
~ the framing of the U.S. Constitution. That document further precluded the concentration of political

power by providing staggered terms of office in the key governmental bodies.

Modern constitutional systems show a great variety of arrangements of the legislative, executive, and

judicial processes, and the doctrine has consequently lost much of its rigidity and dogmatic purity. In the

20th century, governmental involvement in numerous aspects of social and economic life resulted in an

enlargement of the scope of executive power, a trend that accelerated after World War II. Some who fear

the consequences of that development forindividual liberty have favoured establishing means

of appeal against executive and administrative decisions (for example, through an ombudsman), rather

than attempting to reassert the doctrine of the se

e R e PR S N - der
@ CamScanner
i e gy -
_ . y PR R A IEACT: TARRTASR ST . T e - % S
SEPARATION OF POWERS I
Separation of powers "is the division of the legislative, executive, and judicial functions of
government among separate and independent bodies” (Duingan & DeCarlo, 2012, p. 58).
' POWER ‘
| o -thisis bod '
Separation of powers is a political | Le‘tghli:;ature ht the techtec: 4 |
theory, legal doctrine, and political | b e power'to createfaws 'n'a ;
institution which implies the ’ parliament. v |
distribution of state power between e Executive - this is the administrative ,
independent branches such as | body with the power to implement ‘ '
legislative, executive, and judicial. ‘ laws, and often declare war. ; l
. ] Each branch balances the power of [0l e judiciary - enforces laws and . ..
the others can ensures no one branch adjudicates on whether the 07 et ’
| oversteps its authority. legislature and executive are acting :
: it | legallyor constitutionally.
paration of powers. See also checks and balances.
|
1
|
) I
/
d ;
# o
= - )
'F Cenn . i
,E ) '.‘ . ?"‘ i i1 N .
4 n " ) l_-l abn ' » : '
; A . . -'t'-.'ﬁ P - -
:: .'- g 2 : - - ) . . . .
3 N " ;;J- - = . =h e . I?I - '_' .',I'u - ‘ Nl
‘-' _.i " » - _;; -!f-‘-‘:-‘r':: » = II= : I . ._ B ‘ 1
B it A R R AR - Gimhguts D s T i
i~ M Had . ** M it e . ; ooy I fa :
@ CamScanner
